C# and .NET Framework
This book is about programming. It is intended to teach you to think as a 
programmer, to write code, to think in data structures and algorithms and to 
solve problems.
We use C# and Microsoft .NET Framework (the platform behind C#) only 
as means for writing programming code and we do not scrutinize the 
language’s specifics. This same book can be found in versions for other 
languages like Java and C++, but the differences are not very significant.
18 Fundamentals of Computer Programming with C#
Nevertheless, let’s give a short account of C# (pronounced "see sharp").
C# is a modern programming language for development of 
software applications.
If the words "C#" and ".NET Framework" are unknown to you, you’ll learn in 
details about them and their connection in the next chapter. Now let’s explain 
briefly what C#, .NET, .NET Framework, CLR and the other technologies 
related to C# are.
The C# Programming Language
C# is a modern object-oriented, general-purpose programming 
language, created and developed by Microsoft together with the .NET 
platform. There is highly diverse software developed with C# and on the .NET 
platform: office applications, web applications, websites, desktop applications, 
mobile applications, games and many others.
C# is a high-level language that is similar to Java and C++ and, to some 
extent, languages like Delphi, VB.NET and C. All C# programs are objectoriented. They 
consist of a set of definitions in classes that contain methods 
and the methods contain the program logic – the instructions which the 
computer executes. You will find out more details on what a class, a method 
and C# programs are in the next chapter.
Nowadays C# is one of the most popular programming languages. It is 
used by millions of developers worldwide. Because C# is developed by 
Microsoft as part of their modern platform for development and execution of 
applications, the .NET Framework, the language is widely spread among 
Microsoft-oriented companies, organizations and individual developers. For 
better or for worse, as of this book writing, the C# language and the .NET 
platform are maintained and managed entirely by Microsoft and are not 
open to third parties. Because of this, all other large software corporations 
like IBM, Oracle and SAP base their solutions on the Java platform and use 
Java as their primary language for developing their own software products.
Unlike C# and the .NET Framework, the Java language and platform are 
open-source projects that an entire community of software companies, 
organizations and individual developers take part in. The standards, the 
specifications and all the new features in the world of Java are developed by 
workgroups formed out of the entire Java community, rather than a single 
company (as the case of C# and .NET Framework).
The C# language is distributed together with a special environment on which 
it is executed, called the Common Language Runtime (CLR). This 
environment is part of the platform .NET Framework, which includes CLR, a 
bundle of standard libraries providing basic functionality, compilers, 
debuggers and other development tools. Thanks to the framework CLR 
programs are portable and, once written they can function with little or no 
changes on various hardware platforms and operating systems. C# programs 
Preface 19
are most commonly run on MS Windows, but the .NET Framework and CLR 
also support mobile phones and other portable devices based on Windows 
Mobile, Windows Phone and Windows 8. C# programs can still be run under 
Linux, FreeBSD, iOS, Android, MacOS X and other operating systems through 
the free .NET Framework implementation Mono, which, however, is not 
officially supported by Microsoft.
The Microsoft .NET Framework
The C# language is not distributed as a standalone product – it is a part of 
the Microsoft .NET Framework platform (pronounced "Microsoft dot net 
framework"). .NET Framework generally consists of an environment for the 
development and execution of programs, written in C# or some other 
language, compatible with .NET (like VB.NET, Managed C++, J# or F#). It 
consists of:
- the .NET programming languages (C#, VB.NET and others);
- an environment for the execution of managed code (CLR), which 
executes C# programs in a controlled manner;
- a set of development tools, such as the csc compiler, which turns C# 
programs into intermediate code (called MSIL) that the CLR can 
understand;
- a set of standard libraries, like ADO.NET, which allow access to 
databases (such as MS SQL Server or MySQL) and WCF which connects 
applications through standard communication frameworks and protocols 
like HTTP, REST, JSON, SOAP and TCP sockets.
The .NET Framework is part of every modern Windows distribution and is 
available in different versions. The latest version can be downloaded and 
installed from Microsoft’s website. As of this book’s publishing, the latest 
version of the .NET Framework is 4.5. Windows Vista includes out-of-thebox .NET 
Framework 2.0, Windows 7 – .NET 3.5 and Windows 8 – .NET 4.5.
Why C#?
There are many reasons why we chose C# for our book. It is a modern 
programming language, widely spread, used by millions of programmers
around the entire world. At the same time C# is a very simple and easy to 
learn (unlike C and C++). It is natural to start with a language that is 
suitable for beginners while still widely used in the industry by many large 
companies, making it one of the most popular programming languages
nowadays.
C# or Java?
Although this can be extensively discussed, it is commonly acknowledged that 
Java is the most serious competitor to C#. We will not make a 
comparison between Java and C#, because C# is undisputedly the better, 
20 Fundamentals of Computer Programming with C#
more powerful, richer and just better engineered. But, for the purposes of this 
book, we have to emphasize that any modern programming language will be 
sufficient to learn programming and algorithms. We chose C#, because it is 
easier to learn and is distributed with highly convenient, free integrated 
development environment (e.g. Visual C# Express Edition). Those who prefer 
Java can prefer to use the Java version of this book, which can be found here: 
www.introprogramming.info.
Why Not PHP?
With regards to programing languages popularity, besides C# and Java, 
another widely used language is PHP. It is suitable for developing small web 
sites and web applications, but it gives rise to serious difficulties when 
implementing large and complicated software systems. In the software 
industry PHP is used first and foremost for small projects, because it can 
easily lead developers into writing code that is bad, disorganized and hard to 
maintain, making it inconvenient for more substantial projects. This subject is 
also debatable, but it is commonly accepted that, because of its antiquated 
concepts and origins it is built on and because of various evolutionary 
reasons, PHP is a language that tends towards low-quality 
programming, writing bad code and creating hard to maintain software. PHP 
is a procedural language in concept and although it supports the paradigms of 
modern object-oriented programming, most PHP programmers write 
procedurally. PHP is known as the language of "code monkeys" in the 
software engineering profession, because most PHP programmers write 
terrifyingly low-quality code. Because of the tendency to write low-quality, 
badly structured and badly organized programming code, the entire concept 
of the PHP language and platform is considered wrong and serious companies 
(like Microsoft, Google, SAP, Oracle and their partners) avoid it. Due to this 
reason, if you want to become a serious software engineer, start with C# or 
Java and avoid PHP (as much as possible).
Certainly, PHP has its uses in the world of programming (for example 
creating a blog with WordPress, a small web site with Joomla or Drupal, or a 
discussion board with PhpBB), but the entire PHP platform is not wellorganized and 
engineered for large systems like .NET and Java. When it 
comes to non-web-based applications and large industrial projects, PHP is not 
by a long shot among the available options. Lots and lots of experience is
necessary to use PHP correctly and to develop high-quality professional 
projects with it. PHP developers usually learn from tutorials, articles and lowquality books 
and pick up bad practices and habits, which then are hard to 
eradicate. Therefore, do not learn PHP as your first development 
language. Start with C# or Java.
Based on the large experience of the authors' collective we advise you to 
begin programming with C# and ignore languages such as C, C++ and PHP 
until the moment you have to use them.
Preface 21
Why Not C or C++?
Although this is also debatable, the C and C++ languages are considered 
complex and requires deep understanding of hardware. They still have their 
uses and are suitable for low-level programming (e.g. programming for 
specialized hardware devices), but we do not advise you to use C / C++ when 
you are beginner who wants to learn programming.
You can program in pure C, if you have to write an operating system, a 
hardware device driver or if you want to program an embedded device, 
because of the lack of alternatives and the need to control the hardware very 
carefully. The C language is very low-level and in no way do we advise 
you to begin programming with it. A programmer’s productivity under pure C 
is many times lower compared to their productivity under modern generalpurpose 
programming languages like C# and Java. A variant of C is used 
among Apple / iPhone developers, but not because it is a good language, but 
because there is no decent alternative. Most Apple-oriented programmers do 
not like Objective-C, but they have no choice in writing in something else. In 
2014 Apple promoted their new language Swift, which is of higher level and 
aims to replace Objective-C for the iOS platform.
C++ is good when you have to program applications that require very close 
work with the hardware or that have special performance requirements 
(like 3D games). For all other purposes (like Web applications development or 
business software) C++ is inadequate. We do not advise you to pursue it, if 
you are starting with programming just now. One reason it is still being 
studied in some schools and universities is hereditary, because these 
institutions are very conservative. For example, the International Olympiad in 
Informatics (IOI) continues to promote C++ as the only language permitted 
to use at programming contests, although C++ is rarely used in the 
industry. If you don’t believe this, look through some job search site and 
count the percentage of job advertisements with C++.
The C++ language lost its popularity mainly because of the inability to quickly 
write quality software with it. In order to write high-quality software in C++, 
you have to be an incredibly smart and experienced programmer, whereas 
the same is not strictly required for C# and Java. Learning C++ takes 
much more time and very few programmers know it really well. The 
productivity of C++ programmers is many times lower than C#’s and that is 
why C++ is losing ground. Because of all these reasons, the C++ language 
is slowly fading away and therefore we do not advise you to learn it.
Advantages of C#
C# is an object-oriented programming language. Such are all modern 
programming languages used for serious software systems (like Java and 
C++). The advantages of object-oriented programming are brought up in 
many passages throughout the book, but, for the moment, you can think of 
object-oriented languages as languages that allow working with objects from 
the real world (for example student, school, textbook, book and others). 
22 Fundamentals of Computer Programming with C#
Objects have properties (e.g. name, color, etc.) and can perform actions (e.g. 
move, speak, etc.).
By starting to program with C# and the .NET Framework platform, you are on 
a very perspective track. If you open a website with job offers for 
programmers, you’ll see for yourself that the demand for C# and .NET 
specialists is huge and is close to the demand for Java programmers. At the 
same time, the demand for PHP, C++ and other technology specialists is far 
lower than the demand for C# and Java engineers.
For the good programmer, the language they use is of no significant meaning, 
because they know how to program. Whatever language and technology 
they might need, they will master it quickly. Our goal is not to teach you 
C#, but rather teach you programming! After you master the 
fundamentals of programming and learn to think algorithmically, when you 
acquaint with other programming languages, you will see for yourself how 
much in common they have with C# and how easy it will be to learn them. 
Programming is built upon principles that change very slowly over the years 
and this book teaches you these very principles.
Examples Are Given in C# 5 and Visual Studio 2012
All examples in this book are with regard to version 5.0 of the C# language 
and the .NET Framework 4.5 platform, which is the latest as of this book’s 
publishing. All examples on using the Visual Studio integrated development 
environment are with regard to version 2012 of the product, which were also 
the latest at the time of writing this book.
The Microsoft Visual Studio 2012 integrated development environment 
(IDE) has a free version, suitable for beginner C# programmers, called 
Microsoft Visual Studio Express 2012 for Windows Desktop. The difference 
between the free and the full version of Visual Studio (which is a commercial 
software product) lies in the availability of some functionalities, which we will 
not need in this book.
Although we use C# 5 and Visual Studio 2012, most examples in this book 
will work flawlessly under .NET Framework 2.0 / 3.5 / 4.0 and C# 2.0 / 3.5 / 
4.0 and can be compiled under Visual Studio 2005 / 2008 / 2010.
It is of no great significance which version of C# and Visual Studio you’ll use 
while you learn programming. What matters is that you learn the principles 
of programming and algorithmic thinking! The C# language, the .NET 
Framework platform and the Visual Studio integrated development 
environment are just tools and you can exchange them for others at any time.
If you read this book and VS2012 is not currently the latest, be sure almost 
all of this book’s content will still be the same due to backward compatibility.
How То Read This Book?
Reading this book has to be accompanied with lots and lots of practice. You 
won’t learn programming, if you don’t practice! It would be like trying to learn 
Preface 23
how to swim from a book without actually trying it. There is no other way! 
The more you work on the problems after every chapter, the more you will 
learn from the book.
Everything you read here, you would have to try for yourself on a computer. 
Otherwise you won’t learn anything. For example, once you read about Visual 
Studio and how to write your first simple program, you must by all means 
download and install Microsoft Visual Studio (or Visual C# Express) and try to 
write a program. Otherwise you won’t learn! In theory, everything seems 
easy, but programming means practice. Remember this and try to solve 
the problems from this book. They are carefully selected – they are neither 
too hard to discourage you, nor too easy, so you’ll be motivated to perceive 
solving them as a challenge. If you encounter difficulties, look for help at the 
discussion group for the "C# Programming Fundamentals" training course 
at Telerik Software Academy: http://forums.academy.telerik.com (the forum 
is intended for Bulgarian developers but the people "living" in it speak English 
and will answer your questions regarding this book, don’t worry). Thousands 
students solve the exercises from this book every year so you will find many 
solutions to each problem from the book. We will also publish official solutions 
+ tests for every exercise in the book at its web site.
Reading this book without practicing is meaningless! You 
must spend much more time on writing programs than 
reading the text itself. It is just like learning to drive: no one 
can learn driving by reading books. To learn driving, you 
need to drive many times in different situations, roads, cars, 
etc. To learn programming, you need to program!
Everybody has studied math in school and knows that learning how to solve 
math problems requires lots of practice. No matter how much they watch and 
listen to their teachers, without actually sitting down and solving 
problems, they won’t learn. The same goes for programming. You need 
lots of practice. You need to write a lot, to solve problems, to experiment, to 
endeavor in and to struggle with problems, to make mistakes and correct 
them, to try and fail, to try anew and experience the moments when things 
finally work out. You need lots and lots of practice. This is the only way you 
will make progress.
So people say that to become a developer you might need to write at least 
50,000 – 100,000 lines of code, but the correct number can vary a lot. Some 
people are fast learners or just have problem-solving experience. Others may 
need more practice, but in all cases practicing programming is very 
important! You need to solve problems and to write code to become a 
developer. There is no other way!
Do Not Skip the Exercises!
At the end of each chapter there is a considerable list of exercises. Do not 
skip them! Without exercises, you will not learn a thing. After you read a 
24 Fundamentals of Computer Programming with C#
chapter, you should sit in front of the computer and play with the examples
you have seen in the book. Then you should set about solving all problems. If 
you cannot solve them all, you should at least try. If you don’t have all the 
time necessary, you must at least attempt solving the first few problems from 
each chapter. Do not carry on without solving problems after every 
chapter, it would just be meaningless! The problems are small feasible 
situations where you apply the stuff you have read. In practice, once you 
have become programmers, you would solve similar problems every day, but 
on a larger and more complex scale.
You must at all cost strive to solve the exercise problems 
after every chapter from the book! Otherwise you risk not 
learning anything and simply wasting your time.
How Much Time Will We Need for This Book?
Mastering the fundamentals of programming is a crucial task and takes a lot 
of time. Even if you’re incredibly good at it, there is no way that you will 
learn programming on a good level for a week or two. To learn any human 
skill, you need to read, see or be shown how it is done and then try doing it 
yourselves and practice a lot. The same goes for programming – you must 
either read, see or listen how it is done, then try doing it yourself. Then you 
would succeed or you would not and you would try again, until you finally 
realize you have learned it. Learning is done step by step, consecutively, in 
series, with a lot of effort and consistency.
If you want to read, understand, learn and acquire thoroughly and in-depth 
the subject matter in this book, you have to invest at least 2 months for 
daylong activity or at least 4-5 months, if you read and exercise a little 
every day. This is the minimum amount of time it would take you to be able 
to grasp in depth the fundamentals of programming.
The necessity of such an amount of lessons is confirmed by the free trainings 
at Telerik Software Academy (http://academy.telerik.com), which follow this 
very book. The hundreds of students, who have participated in trainings
based on the lectures from this book, usually learn all subjects from this book 
within 3-4 months of full-time work. Thousands of students every year 
solve all exercise problems from this book and successfully sit on 
programming exams covering the book’s content. Statistics shows that 
anyone without prior exposure to programming, who has spent less than the 
equivalent of 3-4 months daylong activity on this book and the corresponding 
courses at Telerik Academy, fails the exams.
The main subject matter in the book is presented in more than 1100 pages, 
which will take you a month (daylong) just to read them carefully and test the 
sample programs. Of course, you have to spend enough time on the exercises 
(few more months); without them you would hardly learn programming.
Preface 25
Exercises: Complex or Easy?
The exercises in the book consist of about 350 problems with varying 
difficulty. For some of them you will need a few minutes, for others several 
hours (if you can solve them at all without help). This means you would need 
a month or two of daylong exercising or several months, if you do it little by 
little.
The exercises at each chapter are ordered in increasing level of difficulty. 
The first few exercises are easy, similar to the examples in the chapter. The 
last few exercises are usually complex. You might need to use external 
resources (like information from Wikipedia) to solve them. Intentionally, the 
last few exercises in each chapter require skills outside of the chapter. We 
want to push you to perform a search in your favorite search engine. You 
need to learn searching on the Internet! This is an essential skill for any 
programmer. You need to learn how to learn. Programming is about learning 
every day. Technologies constantly change and you can’t know everything. To 
be a programmer means to learn new APIs, frameworks, technologies 
and tools every day. This cannot be avoided, just prepare yourself. You will 
find many problems in the exercises, which require searching on the Internet. 
Sometimes you will need the skills from the next chapter, sometimes some 
well-known algorithm, sometimes something else, but in all cases searching 
on the Internet is an essential skill you need to acquire.
Solving the exercises in the book takes a few months, really. If you don’t 
have that much time at your disposal, ask yourselves if you really want to 
pursue programming. This is a very serious initiative in which you must invest 
a really great deal of efforts. If you really want to learn programming on a 
good level, schedule enough time and follow the book or the video lectures 
based on it.
Why Are Data Structures and Algorithms 
Emphasized?
This book teaches you, in addition to the basic knowledge in programming, 
proper algorithmic thinking and using basic data structures in 
programming. Data structures and algorithms are a programmer’s most 
important fundamental skills! If you have a good grasp of them, you will not
have any trouble becoming proficient in any software technology, 
development tool, framework or API. That is what the most serious software 
companies rely on when hiring employees. Proof of this are job interviews at 
large companies like Google and Microsoft that rely exclusively on 
algorithmic thinking and knowledge of all basic data structures and 
algorithms.
The information below comes from Svetlin Nakov, the leading author of this 
book, who passed software engineering interviews at Microsoft and Google in 
2007-2008 and shares his own experience